README.md, before:

# UsersCRUD 

## Overview 
This simple web application allows admin to: 
* [List all users](#read-all)
* [Create users](#create)
* [Edit existing users ](#edit)
* [Display user's details](#read)
* [Delete users](#delete)

## Main Content 
* [Used technologies](#used-technologies)
* [How to use locally](#how-to-use-locally)
* [What application does and how does it look in the code?](#what-application-does-and-how-does-it-look-in-the-code)
## Used technologies
Project was built based on Model view controller design pattern using Maven.
Model layer is implemented on Data Object Access design pattern that communicates with database.
Server is built using Tomcat, which also manages MySql database connection. 
Tomcat servlet container controls the application. 
View is provided by jsp files supported by JSTL library and Expression Language. 
View is based on bootstrap Admin - 2 theme: https://startbootstrap.com/theme/sb-admin-2.  

## Implementation 
### Connection
In order to create connection I used Tomcat servlet container and configured DataSource. 
This DataSource is directly used in DBUtil class. 

### MySql database
Database contains `users` table that has the following columns: 
* id INT unsigned AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY
* username VARCHAR(255)
* email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE
* password VARCHAR(60)

In order to implement DAO pattern I created User class with data fields reflecting above columns. 
CRUD is implemented by UserDao class that communicates with database. Its methods will be described below.

### View
Servlets located in `servlets` directory are responsible for passing needed data to jsp files that use 
JSTL library to get access to passed data. 

## How to use locally
First thing to do is to create MySql database and users table - Please run **create_database.sql** dump file located 
in _installation_ directory - it will create database table that will work properly in our project. 


## What application does and how does it look in the code?
Every action to perform uses particular Model methods that are used in Controller layer that passes all needed data to View layer.
 
# READ ALL
This the welcome page of my application. It lists all users from our database:

![readAll.png](src/screenchots/readAll.png)

#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer method used**: findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit and countAll from UserDao class and private method createUsersFromResultSet
* **View layer**: list.jsp
* **Controller layer**: ReadAll servlet class
 
#### How does it work?
**countAll**: 
It returns number of the records present in database.

**findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit**:
Method accepts two parameters 
- `limit` - which is number of the records to display on the page (specified as const in ReadAll servlet under `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` reference)
- `offset` - it is determined by `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` and page number currently displayed.

Number of pages is calculated by dividing number of retrieved records by servlet constance `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` which is set to 10 records per page. 
Current page number is determined by passed parameter `pageIndex` in page url. 
This parameter is set in list.jsp file by clicking either "Next", "Previous" button or directly by 
clicking on specific page button. Initially is set to 1 - which means that offset is set to 0 (we will get displayed first 10 records).
Implemented mechanism sets the offset based on `pageIndex`. 
Then only specific number of records is queried by **findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit** method.
Having offset and limit specified we can use **findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit** method to retrieve particular user records. 
Then list of users is passed to the view and displayed in `forEach` JSTL loop tag. 
It recognises the first as well as the last page displayed and disables "Previous" or "Next" button accordingly. 
It gives also information which records are currently displayed (this information is calculated by current page index and `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE`)


### CREATE
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: create method from UserDao class and helper InputValidator class.
* **View layer**: add-user-form.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Create servlet class.   


#### How does it work?
Every input has requirements to get positively validated:

![addUser.png](src/screenchots/addUser.png)

InputValidator validates input username, email and password:
* **username** requirements from regex: 
  * must contain alphanumeric characters
  * minimum 8 to 20 characters
  * first character has to be alphanumeric
  * can contain ',' or '_' but they cannot be typed as two in the row for example: "__" or "._" or "_." or ".." - username will be invalid with such combination.
  * lat character also has to be alphanumeric 
* **email** regex is standard. Please see below: 
    * "[_a-zA-z0-9-]+(\\.[_a-zA-Z0-9-]+)*@[a-zA-Z0-9-]+(\\.[_a-zA-Z0-9-]+)*\\.([a-zA-Z]{2,}){1}"
* **password** requirements from regex: 
    * Minimum eight characters 
    * at lead one upper case character 
    * at least one lowercase character 
    * at least one number
    * at least one special character 

Servlet method **doGet** is responsible for displaying create user form. 
First validation is performed by front end `required` input tag attribute, so we avoid sending request with blank data.
After all fields are populated with some input, doPost method gets passed parameters. 
Then given parameters are used in instantiation User object which will be used as parameter for 
create method from UserDao class.
Then helper class InputValidator static method **validateUser** gets invoked that validates every data field from User instance. 
Then two scenarios are possible:
If validation returns boolean _false_ then method terminates returning null value - which means that update query 
is not even executed. 
Then doPost method checks the User instance returned from **create** method and sets `input` parameter 
accordingly. If **user** reference holds null it means that record was not created in database.
If user is added in database then `input` is set to "valid", "invalid" otherwise.
Then we get redirected again to doGet method that checks `input` parameter. It sets `isUserAdded` attribute accordingly.
Based on its value, different views are displayed (flow-control is implemented in View layer): 
* If `isUserAdded` is null add above user form will get displayed. 
* If `isUserAdded` is set to "false" it means either that data provided is invalid or provided e-mail is already assigned to other user:

![incorrectInputCreateForm.png](src/screenchots/incorrectInputCreateForm.png)

If validation returns boolean value _true_ then Connection to database is created along with PreparedStatement.
Before new record added then password is hashed using **Bcrypt** class and its method **hashpw**.
If provided email is not assigned to the other record in database then generated id is set to `id` field of User instance  that will
be returned from method. If there is already email assigned then SQLException is caught and method terminates returning null. 
Then again doPost method checks if returned value is valid instance of User class. If it does then `input` is set to be
"valid". 
Based on that parameter, doGet method sets `isUserAdded` to boolean _true_ that will determine what will be displayed 
in add-user-form.jsp file: 

![userAddedSuccess.png](src/screenchots/userAddedSuccess.png)


### EDIT
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: update method from UserDao class and helper InputValidator class.
* **View layer**: edit-user-form.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Edit servlet class.   

#### How does it work?
As we all know we can access particular views (if they exist) typing url path. Then I had to make my application more 
robust: 

If user enters url manually without any `id` parameter specified, then doGet method will redirect to 
pageNotFound servlet: 

![pageNotFound.png](src/screenchots/pageNotFound.png)

If admin user enters url with id parameter value that is not in database then read method from UserDao class will
return null which is going to be passed as `user` attribute for edit-user-form.jsp.
Then such view will be displayed:

![noUserWithGivenId.png](src/screenchots/noUserWithGivenId.png)

To edit user we click edit button that is displayed along with show and delete buttons in list.jsp file. 
Every edit button is an anchor tag that sets url `id` parameter taken from displayed record.
This `id` parameter is taken by doGet method of Edit servlet. 
Then given id is used in read method from UserDao class that creates User instance based on retrieved data.
User instance is passed to the view as attribute of which data fields will populate(except password - it needs to be reentered) edit-user-form.jsp fields:

![editUser.png](src/screenchots/editUser.png)

After all input fields got some data entered and edit button clicked then all data is passed to doPost method.
Then passed `username`, `email`, `password` parameters are used to instantiate new User object that will be passed as 
parameter to update method from UserDao class. This method also uses InputValidator to check if passed data fields from
User object meet requirements. If they don't then update method returns false which results with setting attribute 
`isUserUpdated` to _false_ and passing attribute `user` as user with old data(to repopulate the edit input fields so user can try again entering correct values this time). 
It will result with such view displayed: 

![incorrectInputEditForm.png](src/screenchots/incorrectInputEditForm.png)

If InputValidator returns _true_ then Connection to database is created along with PreparedStatement object. 
If provided email is used in other record then again above screen will be displayed (`isUserUpdated` will be set again to _false_).
However, if database record gets updated, then `isUserUpdated` will be set to true and `user` attribute will be set to 
updated instance of User class (with newly entered data). 
These attributes are again passed to edit-user-form.jsp file which will result in such view displayed: 

![userEditedSuccess.png](src/screenchots/userEditedSuccess.png)


### DELETE
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: delete method from UserDao class
* **View layer**: delete.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Delete servlet class

#### How does it work?
Again as we all know we can access particular views (if they exist) typing url path. Then I had to make my application more
robust:

If admin user enters invalid `id` parameter in url then admin gets redirected to pageNotfound view: 

![pageNotFound.png](src/screenchots/pageNotFound.png)

If admin enters `id` parameter in url that is not in database then there is no user to delete. 
It means that delete method from UserDao class will return _false_.
It will set attribute `isDeleted` to _false_. It is passed to delete.jsp file. It will result with such 
view: 

![noUserWithIdToDelete.png](src/screenchots/noUserWithIdToDelete.png)

If admin clicks delete button associated with particular record in list.jsp then valid id is passed to 
delete method of UserDao class.
It means that delete method from UserDao class will return _true_.
If deletion is performed successfully then `isDeleted` attribute is set to _true_ that is passed to delete.jsp view.
It results with such view: 

![userDeletedSuccess.png](src/screenchots/userDeletedSuccess.png)

### READ
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: read method and createUserFromResultSet from UserDao class 
* **View layer**: show.jsp
* **Controller layer**: ShowUser servlet class

#### How does it work?

Again, application user might try to enter url path to access particular view. 

If admin user enters url without `id` parameter specified then again will be redirected to pageNotFound address.

If admin enters url with `id` parameter that is not associated with any record in database then read method 
from userDao class will return _null_. This object is then set to `user` attribute and passed to show.jsp file. 
Then based on value form `user` attribute following information will be displayed: 

![noUserWithIdToDisplay.png](src/screenchots/noUserWithIdToDisplay.png)

However, if user enters in url id, that exists in database then the user details will be displayed successfully. 

To get user details displayed, we click **show** button that is displayed along with **delete** and **edit** buttons in list.jsp file.
Every show button is an anchor tag that sets `id` parameter taken from displayed record that redirects us to ShowUser servlet. 
This it is passed as argument for `userId` parameter from read method from UserDao class. 
If record with given id exists in database, then new instance of User class is created with its data fields 
populated with and 
returned to doGet method from ShowUser servlet. Then this instance is set as an `user` attribute and
passed to show.jsp file. 
Data fields from User instance will populate table rows to display all data except password: 

![userDetails.png](src/screenchots/userDetails.png)
Again from this view we are able to edit or delete particular user. 

## Thoughts and future project extensions
Project helped me get little better familiar with using servlets, database connection, SQL as well as with 
passing data from controller to view via attributes and parameters. 
In the future, project would be easily extended with adding additional database storing admin records that 
could manage list of users. Every admin would have to go through login process in order to get access to CRUD 
options. This could be achieved using for example filter. It would be also good to implement soft delete option 
including time of deletion, admin id that performed this as well as include additional columns in database that
tracks last edit datetime and admin that edited particular user. It would be also good to use any revertable hashing
method to hash id that are passed as parameters to url, so they are not visible there. And of course JavaScript scripts must be added to make this 
application more interactive. 
Once I get more knowledge, I will extend this project. 
Cheers!

Commit message:

Fix error in screenshots directory name. Add installation section to README.md file. Change add-user-form.jsp name to add-user.jsp. Change edit-user-form.jsp to edit-user.jsp.

README.md, after:

# UsersCRUD 

## Overview 
This simple web application allows admin to: 
* [List all users](#read-all)
* [Create users](#create)
* [Edit existing users ](#edit)
* [Display user's details](#read)
* [Delete users](#delete)

## Main Content 
* [Used technologies](#used-technologies)
* [How to use locally](#how-to-use-locally)
* [What application does and how does it look in the code?](#what-application-does-and-how-does-it-look-in-the-code)
## Used technologies
Project was built based on Model view controller design pattern using Maven.
Model layer is implemented on Data Object Access design pattern that communicates with database.
Server is built using Tomcat, which also manages MySql database connection. 
Tomcat servlet container controls the application. 
View is provided by jsp files supported by JSTL library and Expression Language. 
View is based on bootstrap Admin - 2 theme: https://startbootstrap.com/theme/sb-admin-2.  

## Implementation 
### Connection
In order to create connection I used Tomcat servlet container and configured DataSource. 
This DataSource is directly used in DBUtil class. 

### MySql database
Database contains `users` table that has the following columns: 
* id INT unsigned AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY
* username VARCHAR(255)
* email VARCHAR(255) UNIQUE
* password VARCHAR(60)

In order to implement DAO pattern I created User class with data fields reflecting above columns. 
CRUD is implemented by UserDao class that communicates with database. Its methods will be described below.

### View
Servlets located in `servlets` directory are responsible for passing needed data to jsp files that use 
JSTL library to get access to passed data. 

## How to use locally
1. First thing to do is to create MySql database and users table - Use **workshop3.sql** dump file located 
in _installation_ directory - it will create database table that will work properly in our project. 
2. Then fork this repository and clone it locally. 
3. Build Tomcat server
4. Configure context.xml file : update database name, user and password credentials as well as database url 
5. Run Tomcat server - Now you are ready to go. 


## What application does and how does it look in the code?
Every action to perform uses particular Model methods that are used in Controller layer that passes all needed data to View layer.
 
# READ ALL
This the welcome page of my application. It lists all users from our database:

![readAll.png](src/screenshots/readAll.png)

#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer method used**: findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit and countAll from UserDao class and private method createUsersFromResultSet
* **View layer**: list.jsp
* **Controller layer**: ReadAll servlet class
 
#### How does it work?
**countAll**: 
It returns number of the records present in database.

**findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit**:
Method accepts two parameters 
- `limit` - which is number of the records to display on the page (specified as const in ReadAll servlet under `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` reference)
- `offset` - it is determined by `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` and page number currently displayed.

Number of pages is calculated by dividing number of retrieved records by servlet constance `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE` which is set to 10 records per page. 
Current page number is determined by passed parameter `pageIndex` in page url. 
This parameter is set in list.jsp file by clicking either "Next", "Previous" button or directly by 
clicking on specific page button. Initially is set to 1 - which means that offset is set to 0 (we will get displayed first 10 records).
Implemented mechanism sets the offset based on `pageIndex`. 
Then only specific number of records is queried by **findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit** method.
Having offset and limit specified we can use **findUsersBasedOnOffsetAndLimit** method to retrieve particular user records. 
Then list of users is passed to the view and displayed in `forEach` JSTL loop tag. 
It recognises the first as well as the last page displayed and disables "Previous" or "Next" button accordingly. 
It gives also information which records are currently displayed (this information is calculated by current page index and `RECORD_NUMBER_BY_PAGE`)


### CREATE
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: create method from UserDao class and helper InputValidator class.
* **View layer**: add-user.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Create servlet class.   


#### How does it work?
Every input has requirements to get positively validated:

![addUser.png](src/screenshots/addUser.png)

InputValidator validates input username, email and password:
* **username** requirements from regex: 
  * must contain alphanumeric characters
  * minimum 8 to 20 characters
  * first character has to be alphanumeric
  * can contain ',' or '_' but they cannot be typed as two in the row for example: "__" or "._" or "_." or ".." - username will be invalid with such combination.
  * lat character also has to be alphanumeric 
* **email** regex is standard. Please see below: 
    * "[_a-zA-z0-9-]+(\\.[_a-zA-Z0-9-]+)*@[a-zA-Z0-9-]+(\\.[_a-zA-Z0-9-]+)*\\.([a-zA-Z]{2,}){1}"
* **password** requirements from regex: 
    * Minimum eight characters 
    * at lead one upper case character 
    * at least one lowercase character 
    * at least one number
    * at least one special character 

Servlet method **doGet** is responsible for displaying create user form. 
First validation is performed by front end `required` input tag attribute, so we avoid sending request with blank data.
After all fields are populated with some input, doPost method gets passed parameters. 
Then given parameters are used in instantiation User object which will be used as parameter for 
create method from UserDao class.
Then helper class InputValidator static method **validateUser** gets invoked that validates every data field from User instance. 
Then two scenarios are possible:
If validation returns boolean _false_ then method terminates returning null value - which means that update query 
is not even executed. 
Then doPost method checks the User instance returned from **create** method and sets `input` parameter 
accordingly. If **user** reference holds null it means that record was not created in database.
If user is added in database then `input` is set to "valid", "invalid" otherwise.
Then we get redirected again to doGet method that checks `input` parameter. It sets `isUserAdded` attribute accordingly.
Based on its value, different views are displayed (flow-control is implemented in View layer): 
* If `isUserAdded` is null add above user form will get displayed. 
* If `isUserAdded` is set to "false" it means either that data provided is invalid or provided e-mail is already assigned to other user:

![incorrectInputCreateForm.png](src/screenshots/incorrectInputCreateForm.png)

If validation returns boolean value _true_ then Connection to database is created along with PreparedStatement.
Before new record added then password is hashed using **Bcrypt** class and its method **hashpw**.
If provided email is not assigned to the other record in database then generated id is set to `id` field of User instance  that will
be returned from method. If there is already email assigned then SQLException is caught and method terminates returning null. 
Then again doPost method checks if returned value is valid instance of User class. If it does then `input` is set to be
"valid". 
Based on that parameter, doGet method sets `isUserAdded` to boolean _true_ that will determine what will be displayed 
in add-user-form.jsp file: 

![userAddedSuccess.png](src/screenshots/userAddedSuccess.png)


### EDIT
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: update method from UserDao class and helper InputValidator class.
* **View layer**: edit-user.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Edit servlet class.   

#### How does it work?
As we all know we can access particular views (if they exist) typing url path. Then I had to make my application more 
robust: 

If user enters url manually without any `id` parameter specified, then doGet method will redirect to 
pageNotFound servlet: 

![pageNotFound.png](src/screenshots/pageNotFound.png)

If admin user enters url with id parameter value that is not in database then read method from UserDao class will
return null which is going to be passed as `user` attribute for edit-user-form.jsp.
Then such view will be displayed:

![noUserWithGivenId.png](src/screenshots/noUserWithGivenId.png)

To edit user we click edit button that is displayed along with show and delete buttons in list.jsp file. 
Every edit button is an anchor tag that sets url `id` parameter taken from displayed record.
This `id` parameter is taken by doGet method of Edit servlet. 
Then given id is used in read method from UserDao class that creates User instance based on retrieved data.
User instance is passed to the view as attribute of which data fields will populate(except password - it needs to be reentered) edit-user-form.jsp fields:

![editUser.png](src/screenshots/editUser.png)

After all input fields got some data entered and edit button clicked then all data is passed to doPost method.
Then passed `username`, `email`, `password` parameters are used to instantiate new User object that will be passed as 
parameter to update method from UserDao class. This method also uses InputValidator to check if passed data fields from
User object meet requirements. If they don't then update method returns false which results with setting attribute 
`isUserUpdated` to _false_ and passing attribute `user` as user with old data(to repopulate the edit input fields so user can try again entering correct values this time). 
It will result with such view displayed: 

![incorrectInputEditForm.png](src/screenshots/incorrectInputEditForm.png)

If InputValidator returns _true_ then Connection to database is created along with PreparedStatement object. 
If provided email is used in other record then again above screen will be displayed (`isUserUpdated` will be set again to _false_).
However, if database record gets updated, then `isUserUpdated` will be set to true and `user` attribute will be set to 
updated instance of User class (with newly entered data). 
These attributes are again passed to edit-user.jsp file which will result in such view displayed: 

![userEditedSuccess.png](src/screenshots/userEditedSuccess.png)


### DELETE
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: delete method from UserDao class
* **View layer**: delete.jsp
* **Controller layer**: Delete servlet class

#### How does it work?
Again as we all know we can access particular views (if they exist) typing url path. Then I had to make my application more
robust:

If admin user enters invalid `id` parameter in url then admin gets redirected to pageNotfound view: 

![pageNotFound.png](src/screenshots/pageNotFound.png)

If admin enters `id` parameter in url that is not in database then there is no user to delete. 
It means that delete method from UserDao class will return _false_.
It will set attribute `isDeleted` to _false_. It is passed to delete.jsp file. It will result with such 
view: 

![noUserWithIdToDelete.png](src/screenshots/noUserWithIdToDelete.png)

If admin clicks delete button associated with particular record in list.jsp then valid id is passed to 
delete method of UserDao class.
It means that delete method from UserDao class will return _true_.
If deletion is performed successfully then `isDeleted` attribute is set to _true_ that is passed to delete.jsp view.
It results with such view: 

![userDeletedSuccess.png](src/screenshots/userDeletedSuccess.png)

### READ
#### Model-View-Controller implementation:
* **Model layer methods used**: read method and createUserFromResultSet from UserDao class 
* **View layer**: show.jsp
* **Controller layer**: ShowUser servlet class

#### How does it work?

Again, application user might try to enter url path to access particular view. 

If admin user enters url without `id` parameter specified then again will be redirected to pageNotFound address.

If admin enters url with `id` parameter that is not associated with any record in database then read method 
from userDao class will return _null_. This object is then set to `user` attribute and passed to show.jsp file. 
Then based on value form `user` attribute following information will be displayed: 

![noUserWithIdToDisplay.png](src/screenshots/noUserWithIdToDisplay.png)

However, if user enters in url id, that exists in database then the user details will be displayed successfully. 

To get user details displayed, we click **show** button that is displayed along with **delete** and **edit** buttons in list.jsp file.
Every show button is an anchor tag that sets `id` parameter taken from displayed record that redirects us to ShowUser servlet. 
This it is passed as argument for `userId` parameter from read method from UserDao class. 
If record with given id exists in database, then new instance of User class is created with its data fields 
populated with and 
returned to doGet method from ShowUser servlet. Then this instance is set as an `user` attribute and
passed to show.jsp file. 
Data fields from User instance will populate table rows to display all data except password: 

![userDetails.png](src/screenshots/userDetails.png)
Again from this view we are able to edit or delete particular user. 

## Thoughts and future project extensions
Project helped me get little better familiar with using servlets, database connection, SQL as well as with 
passing data from controller to view via attributes and parameters. 
In the future, project would be easily extended with adding additional database storing admin records that 
could manage list of users. Every admin would have to go through login process in order to get access to CRUD 
options. This could be achieved using for example filter. It would be also good to implement soft delete option 
including time of deletion, admin id that performed this as well as include additional columns in database that
tracks last edit datetime and admin that edited particular user. It would be also good to use any revertable hashing
method to hash id that are passed as parameters to url, so they are not visible there. And of course JavaScript scripts must be added to make this 
application more interactive. 
Once I get more knowledge, I will extend this project. 
Cheers!
